The AI will be matrix transformation machine where columns are dimensions of consideration. (I.E quality of life, military readiness, etc and the) and the rows are metrics that are generated from the data the AI has available. (I.E our firepower versus their firepower, tons of low quality food consumed, tons of high quality food consumed)

Of course, the AI will not be a single matrix. Each entity that has its own set of personality parameters and is conceptualized as a gestalt personality will contain its own [[Consideration Matrix System]]. With this system it becomes possible to produce a very complex set of objectives from a simple system. It also becomes simply to make an AI "smarter" as you only need to make its CMS more comlicated. The metrics that serve as the input to a CMS can be generalized and shared amongst AI meaning that many seperate AI with very different internal workings can directly communicate with each other and share opinions. It also supports the concept of non unversal information. Each AI will have its own data that it capture and the quantity and quality of data between even two very close AI may be different. This means that AIs that, if information was universal, would agree will otherwise come to different conclusions. Information then becomse the most valuable resource for any AI. And the sharing of information the ultimate collaboration of two AI. For example, a populace can be "convinced" to vote for war be force feeding them information that says a different country is awefull and a threat. Similarly say an AI is drafting an invasion plan. If the AI does not have enough information on the layout of a target defenses or military assets it might very well make the wrong decisions. The same concepts apply to economies and politics.

More generally the CMS is a general tool for the development of complex objectives. A population may emit a huge 100 row vector of metrics and the population's country's governing AI can read that and know exactly the objectives the populace *wants* it to do. "Make higher quality food", "Decrease taxes", "Enlarge the military". Within its own CMS it can then use those as a factor to help develop its own metric-concept relations which will produce more specific sets of metric changes that it can then emit to its sub systems to develop actions plans and projects to cause the changes. The action plans and projects can then be weighed against a risk/reward CMS and then dropped or executed. If executed it can be used to lower the changes desired by the parent AI.

In total, this means the AI is really just using actions and projects to minimize a vectors componets that are a function all many many inputs and personality traits. This also means that chagnes to desires and situation can be smoothly reflected in the desire vectors. For example, an AI ruling a country may want X amount of iron mined, and currently it has a project implace to give grants to manufactures to build mining ships, and the project will produce Z ships in T time. If the AI decides to prepare for a war it will suddenly change X. This changed will no longer balance X - Z = 0. Instead there will be a value that already takes into account the project. This means that changes will be smooth and only reflect the change the is actually required. If the target X was enough iron for the war, but the AI just needs it sooner than the risk/reward CMS will capture the fact that the project is no longer viable as it doesn't offer enough reward in the timeframe the AI needs. Causing a project redesign or a new project to be started and the old one stopped and deleted.