A consideration matrix system is a classic linear transformation system. We have a Ax=b setup.
The A matrix represents the brain of a matrix. It is composed of Rn rows by Cn columns. The Columns are the emotional and metal concepts that make up the AI's personalites values. They are things like quality of life, saftey, economic opportunity. The more concepts that make an AI, the more complicated the AI decision making can get.

The Rows represent Metrics. They are things that an AI **percieves** as affecting its concepts. For example, an AI population might consider the supply versus demand ratio of medical supples. Or the ratio of an AIs and enemy military power versus its own military powers, regardless of its "own" means the AIs home [[country]], or personal assets.
For each column in a row a value will be placed that represents how that metric is affect an AI's concept. For example, a supply/demand ratio of 1 one will certainly have a positive impact on an AIs concept of health and quality of life.

The x vector is a Cn x 1 vector that represents how much an AI values a particular concept. This value is completely emergent and dependent of the AI's situation. For example, during peace time a country's populace might value supply/demand of education, supply/demand of economic opporunites, and quality of life; In a war the populace percieves as a matter of survival it will value military power above all and **might** be willing to sacrifce other concepts.

The B vector is an Rn x 1 vector that is the product of Ax. This vector represent how much an AI wants a certain metric to change, whether it wants a positive change or negative. The magnitude of this vector represents how far the current situation is from where the AI wants it to be. It can be sortof related to the happiness of an AI but also not completely. For example the AI could want better technology even though current technology satisifes all of its needs. Or an already rich AI might want more money; In which case it isnt upset about its monetary position rather its just capitalistic. Further, each metric might be measured with different units. Like a ratio of 1 is balanced and potentially good whereas only having 1 ton of food for the country is awefull and is somthing that must be addressed right away.

The B vector is a complete emergent and unique in that it is totally dependent on the AI's **percived** reality. If a certain AI develops in a hostile place then its personality will be different that an AI that has never experienced a war. All AI will develope in different circumstances and will different sets and qualities of information, leading to completely different personalities.

Note, the functions that generate the metric-concept values are completely arbitrary. They could be math functions, other CMS, complex logic, or maybe even running totals. It doesn't matter as long as they are stable and produce sensible, non erratic output.